Reorganize HIP runtime API how-to (#3622)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/coherence_control.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the coherence control of the HIP
                ecosystem ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, host memory

.. _coherence_control:

*******************************************************************************
Coherence control
*******************************************************************************

> AMD GPUs host and device memory can have two different types of coherence:

Reviewer: This does not only apply to AMD GPUs. The "allocated" is just to make it not seem as if those are two different backing kinds of memory. Also expended the sentence a bit, to give a very short introduction of what coherence even means.
```suggestion
Memory coherence describes how different parts of a system see the memory of a specific part of the system, e.g. how the CPU sees the GPUs memory or vice versa.
In HIP, host and device memory can be allocated with two different types of coherence:
```

* **Coarse-grained coherence** means that memory is only considered up to date at 
  kernel boundaries, which can be enforced through hipDeviceSynchronize,
  hipStreamSynchronize, or any blocking operation that acts on the null
  stream (e.g. hipMemcpy). For example, cacheable memory is a type of
  coarse-grained memory where an up-to-date copy of the data can be stored

>   elsewhere (e.g. in an L2 cache).

Reviewer: I'm not even sure I'd mention kernel boundaries, as they themselves are not "detectable" without synchronization. If two kernels run after each other (in the same stream) without synchronization to the host, the host won't be able to tell whether it sees the memory written from the first or the second kernel.

```suggestion
* **Coarse-grained coherence** means that memory is only considered up to date
  after synchronization, which can be enforced through:cpp:func:`hipDeviceSynchronize`,
  :cpp:func:`hipStreamSynchronize`, or any blocking operation that acts on the null
  stream (e.g. :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`). One reason for this can be writes
  to caches, that the other part of the system can't access, so they
  are only visible once the caches have been flushed.
```

Author: Fixed.

* **Fine-grained coherence** means the coherence is supported while a CPU/GPU 
  kernel is running. This can be useful if both host and device are operating on
  the same dataspace using system-scope atomic operations (e.g. updating an
  error code or flag to a buffer). Fine-grained memory implies that up-to-date
  data may be made visible to others regardless of kernel boundaries as

>   discussed above.

Reviewer: Mostly wording, but I took out the part about atomics - do you have any source on that? I would expect system wide atomics to be something even stronger than fine-grained coherence. Cuda e.g. supports unified memory (which should include fine-grained coherence as described here) starting from compute capability 5.0, but only supports system wide atomics for compute capability 6.0 and above.
```suggestion
* **Fine-grained coherence** means the memory is coherent even while it
  is being modified by one of the parts of the system. Fine-grained
  coherence implies that up to date data is visible to others
  regardless of kernel boundaries.
  This can be useful if both host and device are operating on
  the same data.
```

Author: Fixed.

.. note::

  In order to achieve this fine-grained coherence, many AMD GPUs use a limited
  cache policy, such as leaving these allocations uncached by the GPU, or making

>   them read-only.

Reviewer: This should not only be a side-note, but emphasized on - fine-grained coherence impacts performance of the data accesses of a specific device for easier access to that data for other devices. Not only AMD GPUs deactivate caching for that, memory writes have to always be uncached up to the level where the other devices access the memory (usually last level cache for GPUs and probably system RAM for CPUs)

Author: Added to separate issue.

.. TODO: Is this still valid? What about Mi300?
Developers should use coarse-grained coherence where they can to reduce
host-device interconnect communication and also Mi200 accelerators hardware

> based floating point instructions are working on coarse grained memory regions.

Reviewer: Where is this information from? I've never heard about floating-point (or any other instructions apart from memory accesses) requiring any form of coherency.

Author: Added to separate issue.

The availability of fine- and coarse-grained memory pools can be checked with
``rocminfo``.

> .. list-table:: Memory coherence control

Reviewer: This table should get an introduction for what it describes. At the first read-through I thought it was going to list something relating to rocminfo

Author: Fixed.

    :align: center

    * - API
      - Flag
      - :cpp:func:`hipMemAdvise` call with argument
      - Coherence
    * - ``hipHostMalloc``
      - ``hipHostMallocDefault``
      - 
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``hipHostMalloc``
      - ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` :sup:`1`
      -
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``hipExtMallocWithFlags``
      - ``hipDeviceMallocDefault``
      -
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``hipExtMallocWithFlags``
      - ``hipDeviceMallocFinegrained``
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``hipMallocManaged``
      -
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``hipMallocManaged``
      -
      - ``hipMemAdviseSetCoarseGrain``
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      - ``hipMemAdviseSetCoarseGrain``
      - Coarse-grained

:sup:`1` The :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` memory allocation coherence mode can be
affected by the ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable, if the 
``hipHostMallocCoherent=0``, ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent=0``,
``hipHostMallocMapped=0`` and one of the other flag is set to 1. At this case,
if the ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` is not defined, or defined as 0, the host memory

> allocation is coarse-grained.

Reviewer: This is not really understandable to me. Which flags are the "other" flags in this case? It also seems as if the note below is related to this, but the flags have never been explained. Are they flags or environment variables? If they are flags, they shouldn't be assignable

Author: Fixed.

.. note::

  * At ``hipHostMallocMapped=1`` case the allocated host memory is 
    fine-grained and the ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flag is ignored.
  * The ``hipHostMallocCoherent=1`` and ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent=1`` state is
    illegal. 

Visibility of synchronization functions
================================================================================

The fine-grained coherence memory is visible at synchronization points, however 
at coarse-grained coherence, it depends on the used synchronization function.
The synchronization functions effect and visibility on different coherence 

> memory types collected in the following table.

Reviewer: This description does not fit to the descriptions that were presented earlier - only coarse grained coherence depends on synchronization points. fine-grained coherence is technically also visible at synchronization points, but this gives the wrong impression - it is always visible

Author: Added to separate issue.

> .. list-table:: HIP API

Reviewer: This is not a good heading for this table

Author: Updated.

      - yes
      - yes
      - yes
      - yes
    * - Coarse-grained host memory visibility
      - yes
      - yes
      - depends on the used event.
      - no

Developers can control the release scope for :cpp:func:`hipEvents`:

* By default, the GPU performs a device-scope acquire and release operation
  with each recorded event.  This will make host and device memory visible to
  other commands executing on the same device.

A stronger system-level fence can be specified when the event is created with 
:cpp:func:`hipEventCreateWithFlags`:

* :cpp:func:`hipEventReleaseToSystem`: Perform a system-scope release operation
  when the event is recorded. This will make **both fine-grained and
  coarse-grained host memory visible to other agents in the system**, but may
  involve heavyweight operations such as cache flushing. Fine-grained memory
  will typically use lighter-weight in-kernel synchronization mechanisms such as
  an atomic operation and thus does not need to use.
  :cpp:func:`hipEventReleaseToSystem`.
* :cpp:func:`hipEventDisableTiming`: Events created with this flag will not
  record profiling data and provide the best performance if used for

>   synchronization.

Reviewer: These are macros, not functions (I don't know the correct breathe syntax for them)
```suggestion
*`hipEventReleaseToSystem`: Perform a system-scope release operation
  when the event is recorded. This will make **both fine-grained and
  coarse-grained host memory visible to other agents in the system**, but may
  involve heavyweight operations such as cache flushing. Fine-grained memory
  will typically use lighter-weight in-kernel synchronization mechanisms such as
  an atomic operation and thus does not need to use.
  `hipEventReleaseToSystem`.
* `hipEventDisableTiming`: Events created with this flag will not
  record profiling data and provide the best performance if used for
  synchronization.
```
Also, isn't the fine-grained coherent memory always visible to the other agents in the system? The [docs for hipEventReleaseToSystem](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/docs-develop/reference/hip_runtime_api/global_defines_enums_structs_files/global_enum_and_defines.html#c.hipEventReleaseToSystem) state, that it's making "non-coherent host(?) memory visible to the host". (There might be a typo in the documentation)

Author: We have to check your comment in a separate issue. The suggestion pushed in.

      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      - ``hipMemAdviseSetCoarseGrain``
      - Coarse-grained

:sup:`1` The :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` memory allocation coherence mode can be
affected by the ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable, if the 
``hipHostMallocCoherent``, ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``, and ``hipHostMallocMapped``
are unset. If neither these flags nor the
``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable is set, or set as 0, the host memory allocation is coarse-grained.

.. note::

  * When ``hipHostMallocMapped`` flag is set, the allocated host memory is 
    fine-grained and the ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flag is ignored.
  * Setting both the ``hipHostMallocCoherent`` and
    ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flags leads to an illegal state.

Visibility of synchronization functions
================================================================================

The fine-grained coherence memory is visible at synchronization points, however 
at coarse-grained coherence, it depends on the used synchronization function.
The synchronization functions effect and visibility on different coherence 

> memory types collected in the following table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fine-grained coherence memory is visible at the synchronization points, however the visibility of coarse-grained memory depends on the synchronization function used.
The effect and visibility of various synchronization functions on fine- and coarse-grained memory types are listed here:
```

.. list-table:: HIP synchronize functions effect and visibility

    * - HIP API
      - :cpp:func:`hipStreamSynchronize`
      - :cpp:func:`hipDeviceSynchronize`
      - :cpp:func:`hipEventSynchronize`
      - :cpp:func:`hipStreamWaitEvent`

>     * - Synchronization Effect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * - Synchronization effect
```

>       - host waits for all commands in the specified stream to complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Host waits for all commands in the specified stream to complete
```

>       - host waits for all commands in all streams on the specified device to complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Host waits for all commands in all streams on the specified device to complete
```

>       - host waits for the specified event to complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Host waits for the specified event to complete
```

>       - stream waits for the specified event to complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Stream waits for the specified event to complete
```

    * - Fence
      - system-scope release
      - system-scope release
      - system-scope release

>       - none

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - System-scope release
      - System-scope release
      - System-scope release
      - None
```

    * - Fine-grained host memory visibility
      - yes
      - yes
      - yes

>       - yes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Yes
      - Yes
      - Yes
      - Yes
```

    * - Coarse-grained host memory visibility
      - yes
      - yes
      - depends on the used event.

>       - no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Yes
      - Yes
      - Depends on the used event.
      - No
```

Developers can control the release scope for :cpp:func:`hipEvents`:

* By default, the GPU performs a device-scope acquire and release operation
  with each recorded event.  This will make host and device memory visible to

>   other commands executing on the same device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some useful event-related functions:

- :cpp:func:`hipEvents`: You can control the release scope for ``hipEvents``. By default, the GPU performs a device-scope acquire and release operation with each recorded event. This makes the host and device memory visible to other commands executing on the same device.
```

A stronger system-level fence can be specified when the event is created with 
:cpp:func:`hipEventCreateWithFlags`:

* ``hipEventReleaseToSystem``: Perform a system-scope release operation
  when the event is recorded. This will make **both fine-grained and
  coarse-grained host memory visible to other agents in the system**, but may
  involve heavyweight operations such as cache flushing. Fine-grained memory
  will typically use lighter-weight in-kernel synchronization mechanisms such as
  an atomic operation and thus does not need to use.
  ``hipEventReleaseToSystem``.
* ``hipEventDisableTiming``: Events created with this flag will not
  record profiling data and provide the best performance if used for

>   synchronization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- :cpp:func:`hipEventCreateWithFlags`: You can specify a stronger system-level fence by creating the event with ``hipEventCreateWithFlags``:
  - ``hipEventReleaseToSystem``: Performs a system-scope release operation when the event is recorded. This makes both fine-grained and coarse-grained host memory visible to other agents in the system, which might also involve heavyweight operations such as cache flushing. Fine-grained memory typically uses lighter-weight in-kernel synchronization mechanisms such as an atomic operation and thus doesn't need to use  ``hipEventReleaseToSystem``.
  - ``hipEventDisableTiming``: Events created with this flag don't record profiling data, which significantly improves synchronization performance.
```

.. meta::

>   :description: This chapter describes the coherence control of the HIP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :description: HIP coherence control
```

                ecosystem ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, host memory

.. _coherence_control:

*******************************************************************************
Coherence control
*******************************************************************************

Memory coherence describes how different parts of a system see the memory of a 
specific part of the system, e.g. how the CPU sees the GPUs memory or vice versa.
In HIP, host and device memory can be allocated with two different types of

> coherence:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memory coherence describes how memory of a specific part of the system is visible to the other parts of the system. For example, how GPU memory is visible to the CPU and vice versa.
In HIP, host and device memory can be allocated with two different types of coherence:
```

* **Coarse-grained coherence** means that memory is only considered up to date
  after synchronization, which can be enforced through :cpp:func:`hipDeviceSynchronize`,
  :cpp:func:`hipStreamSynchronize`, or any blocking operation that acts on the
  null stream (e.g. :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`). One reason for this can be writes to
  caches, that the other part of the system can't access, so they are only

>   visible once the caches have been flushed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Coarse-grained coherence:** The memory is considered up-to-date
only after synchronization performed using :cpp:func:`hipDeviceSynchronize`,
:cpp:func:`hipStreamSynchronize`, or any blocking operation that acts on the null stream such as :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`. To avoid the cache from being accessed by a part of the system while simultaneously being written by another, the memory is made visible only after the caches have been flushed.
```

* **Fine-grained coherence** means the memory is coherent even while it is being
  modified by one of the parts of the system. Fine-grained coherence implies
  that up to date data is visible to others regardless of kernel boundaries.

>   This can be useful if both host and device are operating on the same data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Fine-grained coherence:** The memory is coherent even while being modified by a part of the system. Fine-grained coherence ensures that up-to-date data is visible to others regardless of kernel boundaries. This can be useful if both host and device operate on the same data.
```

.. note::

  In order to achieve this fine-grained coherence, many AMD GPUs use a limited
  cache policy, such as leaving these allocations uncached by the GPU, or making

>   them read-only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  To achieve fine-grained coherence, many AMD GPUs use a limited cache policy, such as leaving these allocations uncached by the GPU or making them read-only.
```

.. TODO: Is this still valid? What about Mi300?

Developers should use coarse-grained coherence where they can reduce host-device
interconnect communication and also Mi200 accelerators hardware based floating

> point instructions are working on coarse grained memory regions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mi200 accelerator's hardware based floating point instructions work on coarse-grained memory regions. Coarse-grained coherence is typically useful in reducing host-device
interconnect communication.
```

The availability of fine- and coarse-grained memory pools can be checked with

> ``rocminfo``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To check the availability of fine- and coarse-grained memory pools, use ``rocminfo``:
```

.. code-block:: sh

  $ rocminfo
  ...
  *******
  Agent 1
  *******
  Name:                    AMD EPYC 7742 64-Core Processor
  ...
  Pool Info:
  Pool 1
  Segment:                 GLOBAL; FLAGS: FINE GRAINED
  ...
  Pool 3
  Segment:                 GLOBAL; FLAGS: COARSE GRAINED
  ...
  *******
  Agent 9
  *******
  Name:                    gfx90a
  ...
  Pool Info:
  Pool 1
  Segment:                 GLOBAL; FLAGS: COARSE GRAINED
  ...

> The memory coherence control is described in the following table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The APIs, flags and respective memory coherence control are listed in the following table:
```

.. list-table:: Memory coherence control
    :widths: 25, 35, 20, 20
    :header-rows: 1
    :align: center

    * - API
      - Flag
      - :cpp:func:`hipMemAdvise` call with argument
      - Coherence

>     * - ``hipHostMalloc``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * - ``hipHostMalloc`` :sup:`1`
```

      - ``hipHostMallocDefault``
      - 
      - Fine-grained

>     * - ``hipHostMalloc``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * - ``hipHostMalloc`` :sup:`1`
```

>       - ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` :sup:`1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``
```

      -
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``hipExtMallocWithFlags``
      - ``hipDeviceMallocDefault``
      -
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``hipExtMallocWithFlags``
      - ``hipDeviceMallocFinegrained``
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``hipMallocManaged``
      -
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``hipMallocManaged``
      -
      - ``hipMemAdviseSetCoarseGrain``
      - Coarse-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      -
      - Fine-grained
    * - ``malloc``
      -
      - ``hipMemAdviseSetCoarseGrain``
      - Coarse-grained

:sup:`1` The :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` memory allocation coherence mode can be
affected by the ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable, if the 
``hipHostMallocCoherent``, ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``, ``hipHostMallocMapped``
are unset while one of the other flag is set. At this case, if the 
``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable is not defined, or defined as 0, the

> host memory allocation is coarse-grained.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:sup:`1` The :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` memory allocation coherence mode can be
affected by the ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable, if the 
``hipHostMallocCoherent``, ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``, and ``hipHostMallocMapped``
are unset. If neither these flags nor the
``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable is set, or set as 0, the host memory allocation is coarse-grained.
```

.. note::

  * When ``hipHostMallocMapped`` flag is set, the allocated host memory is 
    fine-grained and the ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flag is ignored.

>   * It's an illegal state, if the ``hipHostMallocCoherent`` and
>     ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flags are set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Setting both the ``hipHostMallocCoherent`` and
    ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flags leads to an illegal state.
```
